---
layout: post
author: George Chapman
title: "Fugitive Space: PADA Studios — Writing — George Chapman"
short_title: "Fugitive Space: PADA Studios"
description: >-
  Looking back on my residency at PADA Studios in Barreiro, Portugal.
image: fugitive-space-pada-studios.jpg
image_alt:
image_caption: "Image: &copy; Fiona Grady / PADA Studios"
date: 30/10/2019
permalink: /writing/fugitive-space-pada-studios.html
---

# Fugitive Space: PADA Studios {#title}
30 August 2019

> "...these days, surely, it was in these crowded places where thousands
of individual itineraries converged for a moment, unaware of one
another, that there survived something of the uncertain charm of the
waste lands, the yards and building sites, the station platforms and
waiting rooms where travellers break step, of all the chance meeting
places where fugitive feelings occur of the possibility of continuing
adventure, the feeling that all there is to do is to *see what
happens*."
> — Marc Augé, _Non-Places: An Introduction to an Anthropology of
Supermodernity_

![PADA Studios, Barreiro. Photo: PADA Studios](/assets/img/fugitive_space-1.jpg)

PADA Studios, Barreiro. Photo: PADA Studios

Barreiro is a town located about six miles south of Lisbon across the
Tagus. It is the home of the former Companhia União Fabril, a
diversified corporation founded by the industrialist Alfredo da Silva in
1871 and nationalised in 1975 after the Carnation Revolution. The city’s
history is inextricably tied to the fortunes of CUF. Its success in the
late 19th and early 20th century resulted in an expansion of the town’s
sprawling industrial factories and reclaimed coastline, and its
subsequent collapse following nationalisation led to an exodus of
workers and residents, leaving the town starved of investment and work
opportunities for decades after. Monuments to da Silva, the company, and
its former workers are scattered across the old town. Da Silva is buried
in a mausoleum on the industrial estate, now owned by Baía do Tejo, a
private land management company.

Today, swathes of empty factories compose the industrial landscape. A
restricted area containing two pyrite ash fields and buildings in
various stages of abandon and decay forms the north edge of the park.
Private companies have begun renting some of the former CUF warehouses
and factory buildings leased from Baía do Tejo, in what appears to be
the early stages of economic regeneration for the town. Some former
employees of CUF still live in the workers' quarters that haven't been
rented out since CUF's collapse in the mid-1970s, until PADA Studios was
offered two cottages on the estate in 2018 to house artists
participating in their residency programme.

![Tim Ralston and Diana Cerezino, founders of PADA Studios. Photo: Fiona Grady](/assets/img/fugitive_space-2.jpg)

Tim Ralston and Diana Cerezino, founders of PADA Studios. Photo: Fiona Grady

In the summer of 2018, Tim Ralston and Diana Cerezino relocated from
London to Barreiro to set up PADA Studios in Barreiro on the grounds of
the former CUF industrial estate. "It began as a dream, a way to start a
new life in Lisbon, but when we found our current location we quickly
realized it was possible to make it happen. Lisbon and in particular the
south bay, is the ideal place to start a project like this," Tim told
Brooke Hailey Hoffert in an interview for Floorr Magazine. Diana adds,
"Every time we visited my family in Portugal we spent time exploring
abandoned buildings in the old industrial areas around Lisbon. Old
factories are everywhere and we loved imagining the projects we could
create in them."

In September 2018, PADA launched its residency programme to offer one-
to three-month residencies to international artists. The residency is
artist-led. Participants approach Tim or Diana with requirements to
carry out projects during their stay. With the exception of a one-to-one
session with Tim in the second week, a group crit and exhibition at the
end of the residency, artists are left to get on with their own work
schedules in the studio.

![Pyrite field on the former industrial estate of CUF, now owned by Baía do Tejo. Photo: PADA Studios](/assets/img/fugitive_space-3.jpg)

Pyrite field on the former industrial estate of CUF, now owned by Baía do Tejo. Photo: PADA Studios

PADA was my first artist residency experience, and so I wasn't sure what
to expect as I had nothing to compare it with. I found the environment
liberating, and quite similar to being back at art school, with the
difference being that all artists at PADA actually show up each day to
do the work.

Being in a position to paint every day without distractions is both
liberating and restrictive. Without the usual daily incursions on your
time, you're left to contend with the stark reality of the blank canvas
and empty studio each day. Looking for distractions from your goal – to
create new work – becomes a very obvious form of procrastination. In
those moments where I didn't feel like painting, especially in the first
week or so where we all seemed to struggle for momentum, I often
thought, "Why am I doing this?" It's a common question a lot of artists
who are new to a residency ask themselves. Why remove yourself from the
comfort of your home and familiar studio environment to focus on your
practice? It raised all sorts of existential questions about personal
responsibility and the will to paint. Over time I was able to let go of
these concerns and engage with the work, but didn't stop thinking about
my reasons for wanting to paint. In the end, it came down to asking
myself how serious I was about developing my practice; how far was I
willing to go?

Having spent the past eighteen months not painting for lack of a proper
studio, it was a definite challenge to revive my practice. Being at PADA
for a month helped me to overcome some inhibitions and allowed me the
time to drift and discover an instinct for how I work best. Sharing a
studio alongside other painters allowed us to exchange ideas, critical
feedback, and techniques - a rare experience for me these days, with my
solitary studio in London.

We often idealise the artist in their studio, working until the early
hours and sleeping in their studio to be close to their work.
Personally, I found that structure and time-limited days are my most
productive. Daily distractions and routines are a part of everyday life;
without them, you're bound to burn out. Images need time to drift. While
a month doesn't seem like much time to complete a coherent body of work,
by the second and third weeks we were all surprised by the amount of
work we had turned out. Creating work in a new and unfamiliar
environment was both very challenging and stimulating. Being around
artists who work around the clock had a way of resuscitating my flagging
ambition to create something new.

![Superette, a group show featuring the work of PADA artists-in-residence during August 2019. Photo: PADA Studios](/assets/img/fugitive_space-4.jpg)

Superette, a group show featuring the work of PADA artists-in-residence during August 2019. Photo: PADA Studios
