---
layout: post
author: George Chapman
title: "Mohammed Sami: The Banality of Time — Writing — George Chapman"
short_title: "Mohammed Sami: The Banality of Time"
description: >-
  A review of Mohammed Sami's recent solo exhibition <em>The Point
  0</em> at Camden Art Centre, where Sami's depictions of empty spaces
  and haunted memories create a strong sense of the uncanny.
image: mohammed-sami-the-rub-of-time.jpg
image_alt:
image_caption:
date: 28/07/2023
permalink: /writing/mohammed-sami-the-rub-of-time.html
---
# Mohammed Sami: The Banality of Time {#title}
28 July 2023

> "When you ignore a long history of conflict, and you paint just a
shadow, the details of history aren't necessary anymore, or not as much
as the effect that lies in the shadow. If people call it trauma, I
slightly disagree because it's not about traumatic things — it's more
like a haunting. It's when the memory haunts and changes different
objects."  
> — Mohammed Sami in conversation with Sohrab Mohebbi

The first thing I tend to notice about Mohammed Sami's paintings is the
light. While nearly all of his work relies on the fragile balance
between presence and absence, what is visible and invisible (all of
which contribute to the "haunting" which he discusses with Sohrab
Mohebbi), for me it's the light that creates the haunted, uncanny mood
in each image. Every window, doorway and object is marked by its
proximity to shadow or penumbra, that intermediate stage of an eclipse
where the object is only partially obscured. This, more than any
other visual device, emphasises the duality in Sami's work.

For anyone familiar with Sami's paintings, duality and ambiguity play an
outsize role in _The Point 0_, Sami's first institutional solo
exhibition, at Camden Art Centre. This is clear from the artwork which
lends the exhibition its title: a large, ochre-coloured oval that fills
the modest canvas with no clear focal point. The abstract nature of the
image forces you to try and fill the void with something recognisable —
like a sandstorm viewed from an aeroplane window — and then a narrative.
But Sami's work is not didactic. He is much more interested in ambiguity
than allegory.

The inability to firmly grasp the "real" nature of what we're observing
is the crucial point (the "point zero") of Sami's work. Each painting in
the exhibition deals with an ambiguity that is reflected in its title.
_Meditation Room_ (2022) offers a view of a room, the light of a
semi-open door pouring into view and partly luminating the portrait of a
military figure. The title suggests a room for meditating, a place to
achieve mental and emotional clarity. But the atmosphere suggests
otherwise: a scrunched carpet is trapped under the semi-open doorway.
The blade of light escaping into the room creates a sense of drama. The
bloody ochre of the room points to something corporeal. And the military
figure whose face is obscured strongly resembles official portraits of
Saddam Hussein, which were mandatory in all homes in Iraq during his
reign of terror. Here, Sami creates just enough visual disturbance to
create a sense of dissonance between what we see and what we interpret
from the image and title. There is something both banal and sinister
happening at the same time.

![Mohammed Sami, 'Meditation Room' (2022). Mixed media on linen. 280 x 230 cm. Photo by Rob Harris. Courtesy of the artist and Modern Art, London](/assets/img/mohammed-sami-1.jpg)

Similarly, in _The Praying Room_ (2021), Sami conjures the banality and
the sinister by rendering an empty room, with a pair of hands in
supplication appearing before us even as the face and body are obscured
by the shadow of another doorway. We cannot see the supplicant, but the
hands face the direction of an ominous spider-like shadow, cast by a
house plant in the foreground. Again we have a dual sense of calm
created by the empty space, and unease created by the shadow of the
plant and doorway.

![Mohammed Sami, 'The Praying Room' (2021). Mixed media on linen. 230 x 285 cm. Photo by Rob Harris. Courtesy of the artist and Modern Art, London](/assets/img/mohammed-sami-2.jpg)

In her memoir _In Memory of Memory_, the Russian poet and novelist Maria
Stepanova ruminates on her family's collective past, prompted by a cache
of artefacts and personal effects left behind by Stepanova's deceased
aunt. "The subjectivity and selectivity of memory," she writes, "means
we can fix on a historical 'excerpt' which has nothing in common with
history itself..." Stepanova is commenting on the proliferation of
digital images that try to capture every moment as an artefact, or
'excerpt' of the past, that can definitively seize the past for us. But
rather than preserving the past, the obsessive cult of preservation only
reinforces narratives and ideas about the past which have nothing in
common with what actually took place — a kind of weird nostalgia or
veneration for a past that in reality was neither idyllic nor innocent.
(Sami, incidently, doesn't work at all from photographs or other visual
source material.)

Possibly one of the more literal depictions of Sami's remembered life is
_Refugee Camp_ (2022). Rendered on an enormous 5.9 metre-wide canvas,
the cinder block residence set atop a large scaling rock face appears
lonely and anonymous. The building is sensitively and eerily lit by the
orange headlights of a car, unseen. The dusk setting and artificial
lighting of the refugee camp reminds me of Hopper's painting _Gas_
(1940), which also uses natural and artificial light to create a sense
of calm and unease while depicting the familiar scene of a petrol
station at night. (While Hopper is often thought of as the painter of
loneliness, his paintings actually depict something more like the
uncanniness of lonely spaces.) Incidently, Sami mentioned [in an
interview with The
Guardian](https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2022/mar/21/mohammed-sami-interview-iraqi-exile-painter-bullets-saddam-hussein)
that his memories of his time spent as a refugee in Sweden are among his
favourite, and that he returns to the country every month.

![Mohammed Sami, 'Refugee Camp' (2022). Mixed media on linen. 290 x 590 cm. Photo by Rob Harris. Courtesy of the artist and Modern Art, London](/assets/img/mohammed-sami-3.jpg)

The themes of loneliness and absence are persistent throughout the
exhibition, and combined with the elements of the sinister and the
banal, they also add a sense of haunting to Sami's work. _Ten Siblings_
(2021) depicts a stack of ten mattresses, viewed up close and rendered
in melancholic blues and greens, set against a dark background. In terms
of haunting and absence, nowhere is the absence of figures more palpable
than in this image. The ostensible portrait that the title promises only
makes sense when considering the absence of any people in the image: the
mattresses are a visual metonym for closeness, and one thinks
immediately of the corporeal impressions left by each body that once lay
on them. Then a follow-up question: where are those bodies now? It's
chilling to make the comparison, but the abandoned beds carry an echo of
the endless inventories of suitcases, shoes, eyeglasses, prostheses and
orthopedic braces discovered at the liberation of Auschwitz-Birkenau.
The comparison feels even more apt considering the context of the Iraq
War which rendered Sami a refugee in Sweden in 2007 before his
resettlement in the UK.

![Installation view of Mohammed Sami, _The Point 0_, at Camden Art Centre 2023. Photography by Rob Harris.](/assets/img/mohammed-sami-4.jpg)

In another painting, _Father Figure 1_ (2019) shows a speckled tiled
wall with a mirror reflecting the identical patterning on the wall
opposite. The empty space is disrupted only by the offside appearance of
a house plant. What is eerie about the apparent calm emptiness of the
view is the feeling that someone or something is just out of view. While
mirrors have traditionally been used as symbols for truth and light in
medieval and renaissance painting, Velázquez, van Eyck and Manet all
showed how mirrors can produce a dual reality: what we perceive versus
what actually is, without any clear distinction between the two. Far
from being a symbol of truth and light, Sami uses it to continue the
theme of ambiguity and dual narrative in his work.

The final image in the exhibition, hung just outside the main rooms so
you almost miss its modest presence, is _Weeping Wall_. A close-up area
of faded patterned wallpaper, bordered by shadows like a vignette,
appears ordinary enough except for the black spot where a picture nail
materialises like a bullet hole. It then becomes clear that the blanched
area of wallpaper is formerly where the mandatory portrait of Saddam
would've been hung. Its absence creates a box of light that
disintegrates into the shadowed edges of the painting.

![Mohammed Sami, 'Weeping Walls III' (2022). Mixed media on linen. 75.5 x 65 cm. Photo by Rob Harris. Courtesy of the artist and Modern Art, London](/assets/img/mohammed-sami-5.jpg)

There's a saying that Stepanova quotes from her great-grandfather in her
memoirs: 'es redt zich azoi', literally, 'it is indeed so', but the
meaning is the exact opposite: 'it is supposed to be so, but I don't
believe a word of it'. Sami's paintings present us with a version of
reality that is tinged with doubt — not at the actual events but at the
unreliability of our own ability to recollect. "My paintings seek to
capture the state of confusion that occurs because of the cut thread
between reality and the imagination; between war narrated and war
witnessed," [Sami tells
us](https://camdenartcentre.org/file-notes/file-note-144-mohammed-sami).
Each painting demonstrates that there is no single authoritative
reading; rather, there are layers of truth and layers of conceit. When
we mine the past for truth, the only concrete feeling we are left with
is its haunting absence.

A new iteration of _The Point 0_, featuring four paintings not shown in
the Camden Art Centre exhibition, is currently on at De La Warr Pavilion
in Bexhil-on-Sea, East Sussex until 28 August 2023. Visit [De La Warr's
website](https://www.dlwp.com/exhibition/mohammed-sami/) for more
information.
