---
layout: post
author: George Chapman
title: "Mohammed Sami: The Rub of Time — Writing — George Chapman"
short_title: "Mohammed Sami: The Rub of Time"
description: ""
image: mohammed-sami-the-rub-of-time.jpg
image_alt:
image_caption:
date: 30/06/2023
permalink: /writing/mohammed-sami-the-rub-of-time.html
---
# Mohammed Sami: The Rub of Time {#title}
30 June 2023

> "When you ignore a long history of conflict, and you paint just a
shadow, the details of history aren't necessary anymore, or not as much
as the effect that lies in the shadow. If people call it traume, I
slightly disagree because it's not about traumatic things — it's more
like a haunting. It's when the memory haunts and changes different
objects."  
> — Mohammed Sami in conversation with Sohrab Mohebbi

The first thing I tend to notice about Mohammed Sami's paintings is the
light. While nearly all of his work relies on the fragile balance
between presence and absence, what is visible and invisible (all of
which contribute to the "haunting" which he discusses with Sohrab
Mohebbi), for me it's the light that creates the haunted, uncanny mood
in each image. Every window, doorway and object is marked by its
proximity to shadow or penumbra, that intermediate stage of an eclipse
where an object or area is only partially obscured. This, more than any
other visual device, emphasises the duality of Sami's work. For anyone
familiar with Sami's work, duality and ambiguity play an outsize role in
the paintings exhibited in _The Point 0_, Sami's first institutional
solo exhibition, at Camden Art Centre. This is clear from the artwork
which lens the exhibition its title: a large, ochre-coloured oval that
fills the modest canvas with no clear focal point. The abstract nature
of the image jolts the mind into filling the void with something
recognisable (a desolate sandstorm viewed from an aeroplane window?),
followed by a narrative (is this Iraq; is it an allegory about the war?)
But Sami's work is not didactic. He is more interested in ambiguity and
suggestion than allegoric symbolism.

While I highly doubt anyone would mistake the shape on the canvas for a
yellow egg (an interpretation put forward by the accompanying exhibition
text), the inability to firmly grasp the "real" nature of what we're
observing is the crucial point (the "point zero") of Sami's work. Every
painting in the exhibition deals with a this/that, here/there,
visible/invisible dichotomy that is also reflected in the ambiguous
title of each work. _Ten Siblings_, for example, objectively depicts a
life-size stack of ten mattresses bathed in a sinister light. The
ostensible portrait of siblings only makes sense when considering the
absence of any people in the image: the mattresses are a visual metonym
for closeness, and one thinks immediately of the corporeal impressions
left by each body that once lay on them. Then a follow-up question:
where are they now? It's chilling to make the comparison, but the
abandoned beds carry an unmistakeable echo of the almost unending
inventory of suitcases (not to mention shoes, eyeglasses, prostheses and
orthopedic braces) discovered and preserved at Auschwitz-Birkenau. The
comparison feels even more apt considering the context of war in Iraq
which rendered Sami a refugee in Sweden in 2007 before his resettlement
in the UK.

Possibly one of the more literal depictions of Sami's remembered life
(he doesn't work at all from photographs, relying instead on "feelings,
moments, incidents and places") is _Refugee Camp_. Rendered on an
enormous 5.9 metre-wide canvas, the refugee camp is an anonymous
cinder block residence set atop a large scaling rockface. The building
is sensitively and eerily lit by the orange headlights of a car, unseen.
Here, it is the buildings bathed in an <eerie> orange light that creates
the Hopper-esque sense of unease, <heimweh> and the uncanny. (Sami
mentioned in <an interview in The Guardian> how his days at the refugee
centre in Sweden were among his happiest memories.)

<insert reference to blog post about uncanny light and its relationship to haunting and memory>

To dwell on memory for a bit, I recently read Maria Stepanova's memoir
_In Memory of Memory_, in which the author ruminates on her own, and her
family's, collective past. The recollections are prompted by a cache of
artefacts and personal effects left behind by Stepanova's deceased aunt.
"The subjectivity and selectivity of memory," she writes, "means we can
fix on a historical 'excerpt' which has nothing in common with history
itself..." Stepanova is commenting on the proliferation of digital
images that try to capture every moment as an artefact, or 'excerpt' of
the past, that can definitively seize the past for us. But rather than
preserving the past, the obsessive cult of preservation only reinforces
narratives and ideas about the past which have nothing in common with
what actually took place - a kind of weird nostalgia or veneration for a
past that in reality was neither idyllic nor innocent.

In his Disintegration Loops series, the composer William Basinski
demonstrated, literally, how the attempt to preserve memory - for him in
the form of old cassette tapes containing New Age sound loops recorded
from the radio - inherently alters or destroys it. All we are left with
is the residue, the haunted trace, the knowledge that something _was_
there, but is now permanently absent.

"My paintings seek to capture the state of confusion that occurs because
of the cut thread between reality and the imagination; between war
narrated and war witnessed," Sami tells us.

Nowhere is the absence of figures more palpable than in _Father Figure
1_ (2019), which depicts a speckled tiled wall with a mirror reflecting
the identical patterning on the wall opposite. The empty space is
disrupted only by the offside appearance of a houseplant. <Otherwise, we
are entirely alone.> What is eerie about the apparent calm emptiness of
the view is the feeling that someone or something is just out of view.
While mirrors have traditionally been used as symbols for truth and
light in medieval and renaissance painting, Velázquez, van Eyck and
Manet all showed how mirrors can produce a dual reality: what we
perceive versus what actually is, without any clear distinction between
the two. Far from being a symbol of truth and light, Sami uses it to
continue the theme of ambiguity and dual narrative in his work.

The final image in the exhibition - hung just outside the main rooms so you almost miss its modest presence - is _Weeping Wall_. A close-up 

A new iteration of _The Point 0_, featuring four paintings not shown in the Camden Art Centre exhibition, is currently on at De La Warr Pavilion in Bexhil On Sea, East Sussex until 28 August 2023. Visit [De La Warr's website](https://www.dlwp.com/exhibition/mohammed-sami/) for more information.


sinister -> left handed
